2073 - Upper America - It had been 30 years since the holocaust that wiped out the world's former superpower.  Largely a barren wasteland now, the remaining population of North America has been living under a martial law enforced by a battered and bruised government.  With the hope of striking back, those in power remain in hiding, fearing annihilation from foreign opposition, and violent revolution from their own populace.  Through the marvel of technology, the old order has been able to assert their supremacy over the common citizen.  Large machines - commonly known as Droids - patrol the streets of the remaining cities, enforcing "law" and "order" with merciless efficiency.  Those caught violating the edicts of the government are sent to prison camps, where they are held at mechanical gunpoint and worked to death by uncaring machines.
	Jump ahead ten years.  You return home to find an unwelcome visitor in your house.  Your wife lies on the ground, unconscious, three feet away from the large man, who fails to notice as you enter the room.  As you advance on him, you brush a nearby table, causing the lamp on it to crash to the floor.  The thief bolts.  Not thinking, you give chase, and eventually catch him on the street, where you tackle him and hold him to the ground, taking out your frustrations on the would-be criminal.
	Next, you hear a deafening siren.  You are enveloped by a blinding light, as a mechanical voice informs you that you are under arrest for disturbing the peace.  The thief smiles at you as you are lifted into a police wagon by the droid that mistakenly identified your "crime".
	You awaken in a small room.  Bread and water are at your feet, and an ache is in your head.  Looking around, you see the stereotypical prison bars blocking the exit of what appears to have been a small storage area at one point.  Looking around a bit, you uncover crates marked "USMC" - apparently they were overlooked during the conversion.  Armed and ready, you prepare to make good your escape...
