Midworld
Design Document

1.  Overview

	1.1  Game
	
	Midworld is a 2D shooter game sort of like Target Quake.  The player 
	will run around and shoot things using a crosshair that stands out in 
	front of the player.  The view will be top-down, and the terrain will
	not be tile based.  The world the player is in will be a post nuclear 
	world that contains a retro fifties/Gattaca style.  

2.  Objective

	2.1  To blow things up with a multitude of weapons and items.
	2.2  To enjoy 2.1

3.  Graphics

	The graphics in Midworld will not be tile based, but will instead be
	pieces of loaded images merged into a map, or a randomly generated 
	terrain map.  The camera will be top down, and a crosshair will stand 
	out in front of the player.  The distance from the crosshair and the 
	player will vary depending on the type of weapon the player currently 
	has equipped.  The player will move the character by acceleration and 
	deceleration keys and will turn the character by rotating the crosshair
	with the mouse.  

4.  Weapons

	The main character has a variety of weapons at his disposal.  
	The weapons are rated from one to five on speed, crosshair distance,
	shot power, and reload time.  A one indicates a low score; this 
	translates over into a slow speed, short crosshair distance from 
	the player, weak shot, and a slow reload time respectively.  A five 
	indicates a hight score; this translates over into a fast shot, long
	crosshair distance from player, strong shot, and a fast reload time 
	respectively. Finally, rounds can either bounce off of walls and 
	objects or not bounce.  This is a yes/no value.
	
	4.1  Homing Missiles
	
	Missiles that home in on an enemy.  Ideas were to make the missiles
	shoot up towards the camera first, and then have them streak after the
	oppenent in a circular fashion, or to have the rotate around the player
	first, and then swirl around on the screen after the opponent.
	
	Speed:  	4
	Crosshair:  	2
	Power:		3
	Reload: 	2
	Bounce:		No
	
	4.2  Grenades
	
	Grenades are lobbed by the player in the air and bounce a few times on
	the ground before detonating.

	Speed:		2
	Crosshair:	4
	Power:		4
	Reload:		2
	Bounce:		Yes
	
	4.3  Plasma
	
	Plasma shoots a plasma ball towards the enemies; nothing special here,
	just a standard shot.  

	Speed:  	3
	Crosshair:	3
	Power:		2
	Reload:		3
	Bounce:		No
	
	4.4  Spread Shot
	
	Think Contra :)  The spread shot will shoot several smaller plasma 
	shots in a spread formation.  

	Speed:		3
	Crosshair:	3
	Power:		3
	Reload:		3
	Bounce:		Yes
	
	4.5  LR Rifle

	Long range rifle; useful for making those distance shots.  Fires a 
	single round very quickly to a point a long distance away.  

	Speed:		4
	Crosshair:	5
	Power:		4
	Reload:		1
	Bounce:		No

	4.6  BFG

	BIG Gun.  Very strong, average speed, very slow reloading time, 
	VERY hard to aim.  Blows anything and everything out of its path.  

	Speed:		3
	Crosshair:	1	
	Power:		5
	Reload:		1
	Bounce:		Yes

	4.7  Counter-column Shot

	Shots that zig-zig across each other in a counter-column arc.  

	Speed:		4
	Crosshair:	3
	Power:		3
	Reload:		3
	Bounce:		No

	4.8  Boomerang Shot

	Shots that fire out a set distance from the player (to the crosshair),
	and then return to him.  Up to three boomerang shots can be fired 
	simultaneously.

	Speed:		3
	Crosshair:	4
	Power:		3
	Reload:		2
	Bounce:		No
	
	4.8  Assault Rife

	Modified M-16 Assualt Rifle that fires energy burst rounds.  Very fast,
	very weak, nasty reload.

	Speed:		5
	Crosshair:	3
	Power:		2
	Relaod:		1
	Bounce:		Yes
	
5.  Controls

	The controls will move both the character and the crosshair.  The
	player can rotate the crosshair, and move the character forward and 
	backward.  Additionally, the player will be able to make the character
	strafe to the left and to the right.  The player should also be able to
	select his current weapon from his list of all possessed weapons, and
	finally, fire the selected weapons.  

6.  First Revision Goals

	These are the goals we outlined to be done for the first revision.

	6.1  Movable main character

	The main character should be movable by the player.  The player should 
	be able to rotate the main character, move forward, backward, strafe 
	left, and strafe right.  

	6.2  Enemies

	For the first revision, enemies will be simple shapes that move in
	random directions.

	6.3  Basic Weapon Funcionality

	At the very least, the plasma weapon should be functional.

	6.4  Visible Terrain

	There should be some type of terrain that is visible so that the player
	is not just moving along a dark (or bright) mass.  
