Possible title: Dark Space
Suggested by: David Lastine 
dlastine@iastate.edu

Motivation
I've felt for a while that one realistic aspect of strategy games have missed
is a delay in communications.  This game tries to add in a delay while
maintaining a fun game.  While writing this document the game evolved till it
resembled a dos game I once had.  I'm not certain of its name but it may have
been "Star Quest"

This game is a mix between real time strategy games like War Craft but having
diplomatic and strategy elements like Master of Orion.

1       Objective - Make allies and eliminate everyone else.
2       Setting
        A region of space where high background radiation prevents long distance
radio communication.  Clusters of asteroids float around in space.
        2.1  Asteroid clusters
                Clusters are made up of 10 to 20 asteroids each.  On each of
these asteroids a mine/factory can be built.
        2.2 Empty space
                Empty space in this game is filled with radiation.  The
radiation limits communications between ships to only ships in visible range. 
Ships can act as relays allowing information to be transmitted across the game
map instantly.  Empty space should be sufficiently vast to make this an
unattractive option for maintaining communications between asteroid
clusters.    The game map will be mostly empty space so asteroid clusters and
enemy ships can be go undiscovered for considerable periods of time. 
        2.3 Exploration.  Besides the asteroid cluster the player starts in,
space is unmapped and remains so until it is explored by spacecraft. 
Spacecraft must return in order to report findings.  Maps of space may also be
obtained diplomatically once other empires have been encountered.

3       Structures
3.1 Mines
                Mines are mining craft that have permanently attached
themselves
to a given asteroid.  They mine minerals at a constant rate from asteroids. 
These minerals can be used by the mine to produce any player-controlled
object.  Each will have a certain mineral cost attached to it.  Up to three
construction projects can be underway at any one time but resource allegation
will be automatic set to each one getting an equal share of recourses.
                3.1.1 Minerals may not be stored in the mine.  They may however
be loaded onto freighters.
                3.1.2 Equipment that is used on ships is build by a mine or
star
base.
                3.1.3 Damage to ships can be repaired at a factory.
3.2 Star Base
                3.2.1 A Star Base will consist of a cluster of Star Base Craft
that have docked together to form a star base.  Minimums of four craft are
required to form a base.
                3.2.2 A Star Base has one Equipment spot for every two Star
Base
Craft.
                        3.2.2.1 If a craft leaves the base by undocking or
being
destroyed and the number of equipment spots can not be maintained that spot is
lost without any cost of building the equipment being recouped.
                3.3 If mineral resources are available a star base may perform
any building/repairing function that a mine can.  Also it may building
equipment in its own equipment places and repair itself.  Mineral resources
must come from freighters.

4       Ships
        4.1 Spy/raider ship  (40 hit points)
                4.1.1 One gun, fairly weak
                4.1.2 Fastest ship in the game which is not warp capable
                4.1.3 Automatically includes miniaturized version of long-range
sensors 
        4.2 Diplomatic vessel (20 hit points)  cheapest ship to build
                4.2.1 no weapons
                4.2.2 fast ship
                4.2.3 Carries messages between asteroid clusters / between
empires
        4.3 Small ships (100 hit points)
                4.3.1 One equipment spot
                4.3.2 Fast vessel
        4.4 Medium ship (300 hit points)
                4.4.1 Two equipment spots
                4.4.2 Medium speed vessel
        4.5 Large vessel (800 hit points)
                4.5.1 Three equipment spots
                4.5.2 Slow moving
        4.6 Command vessel (1500 hit points)
                4.6.1 Holds four  weapons spaces
                4.6.2 Slow moving
                4.6.3 Equipped with warp drive.  Warp drive moves the ship
though space at an incredible speed.  But due to the hug power requirements an
onboard energy storage system is required.  While this system converts
background energy to useable energy it does so slowly thus preventing the
frequent or prolonged use of the drive.  A status bar would indicate stored
energy levels.
                4.6.4 Players ship.  If it is destroyed the game ends
        4.7 Mining craft
                No weapons, lands on selected asteroid and transforms into
mine.
        4.8 Freighters
                4.8.1 Medium speed
                4.8.2 Carry cargo
                        4.8.2.1 Minerals
                        4.8.2.2 Missile refills.  These refills may be loaded
onto the recipient ship/star base anywhere in the game map.  Each freighter
carries 8 missiles.
                        4.8.2.3 Instead of cargo a missile launcher can be
hidden inside but it can only hold 2 missiles.

5 Equipment
        5.0
                Ships are built without equipment onboard.  After they are
constructed they may enter the game or have equipment added.  Equipment on a
ship may be changed once a ship's equipment bays have been filled but new
equipment is at full cost.
        5.1 Regular guns
                A weapon that fires an energy ball at enemy ships.  It has the
speed half that of a typical gun in an arcade game and does 15 points damage.
        5.2 Regular missiles
                A missile that does 25 points damage.  Eight of them fit into
one weapons space.  After they have been fired a refill is needed.
        5.3 Shields  
Block 5 points of damage from each attack. Only one may be put onboard a ship 
        5.4 Engine booster
                Increases ship speed.  Only one may be put onboard a ship
        5.5 Long Range Sensors
                Gives a ship twice its normal field of view.  Requires 2
equipment spaces.
        5.6 False Image Projector
                Device capable of projecting false information to craft with
Long Rage Sensors provided it is outside of that ships normal site range. 
Requires 3 equipment spaces.  These false images could range from no
ship/asteroids in the area to fake reports of asteroid cluster or battle
fleets.
                
6 Diplomacy and Communications
        6.1 Messages between asteroid clusters and fleets must be carried by a
ship.  However diplomatic vessels are provided as the cheap way of
communicating between forces.  The main point of this method of communications
is to allow for hostile forces to cut off communications.  A second interesting
side effect would be that declarations of war or piece would have to be sent
around the empire, so battles could take place between forces not aware of a
piece treaty.  Also a former allies war fleet could come close to a base and
open fire on it before word of hostilities had reached said base.

        6.2 Communication between empires
                6.2.1 Only diplomatic vessels or the command ship may carry
messages between different empires.
                        6.2.1.1 A message between empires can only be delivered
to a factory or command ship.
                        6.2.1.2 If diplomatic vessel encounter a vessel other
than the command ship of the empire it is trying to contact it does one of four
things:  asks for directions to a contact point (a mine and/or command ship),
request permission to go to a specific point in space (assumable an asteroid
cluster but not restricted), asks for an escort, or it may just ignore the
vessel.
        If permission is refused for a destination or directions not given, a
diplomatic vessel may request a different point in space or send a different
message.  However there is no guaranty a ship will respond to a diplomatic
vessel or not attack it.
        Any vessel may be asked for an escort, besides being protected asking
for escort could be used as a ploy to break up fleets into small weak sections,
lure vessels from their post or even lead vessels into traps.
        A diplomatic vessel does not have to be honest.  After receiving
clearance to a destination or directions it can turn around and head home to
report the directions or that clearance was received.  This would serve as a
type of intelligence gathering.  Of course the directions received could be
dishonest as well, possible leading into a trap, enemy base, or natural hazard.
        6.3 Diplomatic messages
                6.3.1 Declaration of war
                6.3.2 Request for peace
                        6.3.2.1 This may include Offer to send supplies by
freighter or Maps of space as incentive for peace.  See next two sections for
description.
                6.3.3 Offer to send freighters with minerals/missiles. Of
course
this could just be a clever ploy to send in a bunch of freighters armed with
missiles in past the outer defenses.
                6.3.4 Maps of know space along with latest news on fleet
deployments of all known forces.  This information could be accurate or fake. 
Some type of control would allow the player to doctor the information sent to
their specifications.
7 AI
        7.1 Bases not currently in contact with the players ship
                7.1.1 A central AI would be left in control of each asteroid
cluster.  It would have an objectives say: populate all asteroids with mining
colonies, build 5 small ships, 2 medium, 1 large, and equip the large ship with
a False Image Projector and project an image of empty space.
        7.2 Ships, missions, and fleets
                7.2.1 A ships AI would need to be able to follow one of a
number
of missions.
                        7.2.1.1 Scout  look for new asteroid clusters.  If
equipped with long-range sensors stay out of sensor rage of any vessels
detected.  Possibly follow vessel to its destination and report back.
                        7.2.1.2 Escort  follows a ship and fire at any hostels
in the area.
                        7.2.1.3 Deliver message  find ship / base and relay
orders to it and get a status report.
                        7.2.1.4 Attack  proceed to specified location and
destroy enemy base.
                        7.2.1.5 Blockade  form a ring around a base or asteroid
cluster.  Destroy any vessels trying to leave the area.
                        This is not an exhaustive list.
        7.3 Control of AI.  A dialog box with a drop down menu would allow for
mission selection.  Once a mission is selected radial buttons with behavioral
options would appear.  Or instance a vessel on patrol may have the default
option of ignoring diplomatic craft with the selectable options such as, escort
allied vessel, direct to asteroid cluster, relay false map to ship, attack
diplomatic vessel, grant permission to any area of space and so on.

8 Brain Storming
*hazards in space such as black holes.
*asteroid groups moving relative to each other.
*heat seeking missiles that if they miss and end up roaming deep space. 
Encounters ship long after battle is over and attacks it.
*have space be inside a nebula.  Gas density varies so visibility varies,
possible to the point of having a ship almost at ramming distance before its
detected.
*take over enemy vessels and have takeover not discovered till the vessel
starts attacking friendly craft.
*impersonating other empires vessels thereby sabotaging their relationships,
attacking their allies or starting wars against them.

