FINAL FANTASY CHESS VERSION 0.999b

as written by Andy Juell for distribution to a site totally different
than the one it probably ended up on, so no offense intended in case
someone manages to pull something offensive out of this.

"Look out worlds!"

Yes, here it is, Final Fantasy Chess!

Please excuse the toned down non-chess lingo.  I'm distributing
this to a few people who aren't chess maniacs too.  I know you
know what a rank is and what a file is, but I can't count on
everyone doing that and didn't feel like rewriting it.

Here's the basic opening setup.
                
                            Normal              Promoted           

 -------------------------  Ki=King		Em=Emperor
 |BC|DN|BM|AS|Ki|RM|Dr|Ch|  AS=AirShip          WS=WarShip
 |-----------------------|  WC=White Chocobo	MC=Magic Chocobo
 |Dw|Dw|Dw|Dw|Dw|Dw|Dw|Dw|  Ch=Chocobo          CB=ChocoBot
 |-----------------------|  BC=Black Chocobo	BT=Black Talon
 |XX|  |XX|  |XX|  |XX|  |  WM=White Mage	WW=White Wizard
 |-----------------------|  RM=Red Mage		RW=Red Wizard
 |  |XX|  |XX|  |XX|  |XX|  BM=Black Mage	BW=Black Wizard
 |-----------------------|  Pa=Paladin		TP=True Paladin
 |XX|  |XX|  |XX|  |XX|  |  Dr=Dragoon		DM=Dragon Master
 |-----------------------|  DN=Dark kNight	BN=Black kNight
 |  |XX|  |XX|  |XX|  |XX|  Dw=Dwarf
 |-----------------------|  Sy=Sylph  
 |Dw|Dw|Dw|Dw|Dw|Dw|Dw|Dw|  Mo=Moogle		
 |-----------------------|  			DT=Dwarvish Tank
 |Ch|Dr|RM|Ki|AS|WM|Pa|WC|                      Ca=Caller
 -------------------------  			MN=Magitek kNight

The basic idea of chess-like moves are the same, so I'll just point
out so I won't need to retype it later that each side gets to move
one piece each turn, etc.  Some special abilities don't require a move
to be made to be used, such as protection.  The one significant difference
between the setup for regular chess and FF-chess is that the Kings
are both on white squares and the square in the lower-right corner
from each player's perspective should be black (yes this is actually
important this time around...:>) Plus, make sure you keep track
of pieces you have captured (don't throw them back in the box with
the spares). You may need them. 

Given the flavors of soldiers available, en passant is an irrelevant 
question, and castling, I'll tell you now, is flat out.  The pieces
are QUITE spiffy enough on their own without the King having early
access to a colored Chocobo.  Some new concepts will need to be
explicitly defined though.

First, there is "carrying."  Unless an explicit exception is made,
"carriers" may not be used until a friendly character moves onto them,
thus mounting or boarding them.  After this is done, subsequent moves
are made only by the carrier piece until the rider decides to dismount
rather than move the carrier, making it's normal move to do so.  No special
moves from on a carrier until after a normal move has been used to dismount.
If an enemy captures a carrier piece that is being ridden, both pieces in
that square are removed from play: the carrier AND the rider.  
If an enemy piece uses a normal move to capture a currently-unused
carrier piece, that piece may either be removed from play or be converted
to the capturer's side, at the capturer's option.

Then there is the "slay from distance" special attack.  Using this ability,
a piece may remove an enemy piece from play without actually moving to
occupy its square.  This renders the idea of defense in need of revision
at best, to useless at worst.

Then there is the ever-popular "protection".  Using this ability, a piece
my render a piece in its zone of protection immune to capture.  Yes, 
completely immune.  Well, almost.  Only an explicitly protection-piercing
attack can actually capture a piece, but a king is not removed from check
by protection.  Note that protection is INHERENT, it does not require 
activation, (counting as a move) as would slay-from-a-distance.
Heck, guess I didn't say that loud enough.

IMPORTANT REMINDER:  The use of a special ability only counts as a move if
it moves a piece, causes a piece to change loyalties, or removes a piece 
from play.  Thus, immunities and protection, etc. DO NOT REQUIRE A PLAYER 
TO USE HIS MOVE TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THEM.  Sorry for those of you who
already knew that, but not everyone is so intelligent, or so a few of my
earlier playtesters would have me believe. :)

Otherwise, read over the piece definitions, and get ready to play!

King:
  Normal:  moves and captures like a normal-chess king
  Special: may convert any enemy piece a king's move away from it
	     to his side.

Airship:
  Carrier: moves and captures like a normal-chess queen.  Unless
            it just made a capture, was just boarded, or just had
            a rider disembark on the previous turn, it is inherently
            immune to capture by normal moves (though special moves
            take it out just fine).  Unlike other carriers, Airships
	    may carry more than one additional piece, though how
	    this would be represented is beyond me. 
  Special: may jump over any number of intervening pieces in a move,
            but if it does so, may only land on a white square and
            may not capture in same move.  

White Chocobo:
  Carrier:  moves and captures like a normal-chess Rook
  Special:  riders may use special moves while riding 

Chocobo (yellow):
  Carrier:  moves and captures like a normal-chess Rook
  Special:  may move(but not capture) as a normal-chess Rook without rider

Black Chocobo:
  Carrier:  moves and captures like a normal-chess Rook
  Special:  may jump over any number of intervening pieces in a move,
	     but if it does so, may only land on a black square and
	     may not capture in same move.

White Mage:
  Normal:  moves and captures like a normal-chess Bishop
  Special: protects all friendly pieces a Bishop-move from it.

Red Mage:
  Normal:  moves and captures like a normal-chess Bishop, may move
            or capture 2x1 non-jumping (like non-jumping knight)
  Special: protects all friendly and may slay from distance any enemy
	    piece exactly two squares diagonally from it.

Black Mage:
  Normal:  moves and captures like a normal-chess Bishop
  Special: may "slay from distance" any enemy piece a Bishop-move from it.


Paladin:
  Normal:  moves and captures like a normal-chess Knight
  Special: protects all friendly pieces a King-move from it.

Dragoon:
  Normal:  moves and captures like a normal chess Knight
  Special: may capture in a 3x1 jumping L (a normal knight move is a 2x1
             jumping L) but may not make this move without capturing

Dark Knight:
  Normal:  moves and captures like a normal-chess Knight
  Special: may slay from distance any enemy piece a King-move from it.

Dwarf:
  Moves as a normal chess pawn, except that it has no double starting
  move, and a piece directly in front of a Dwarf may not use its special
  abilities. Upon reaching the final row, it promotes to the piece that
  began in the space it promotes in.  For example if Light's White Mage's
  Dwarf advances straight  ahead to the square opposite it, it becomes a 
  Red Mage upon promotion.  But what happens when you promote on the enemy
  King's home square you ask?  You may choose to promote to any of the 
  other pieces (other than another King, Dwarf, Sylph or Moogle) OR any 
  of the three special pieces:  the Dwarvish Tank, the Caller, and
  the Magitek Knight (yes I know they're from FF3 and everyone else
  is from FF2 but I couldn't resist)  

Dwarvish Tank:
  Carrier:  moves but does not capture as a normal-chess Rook.   
		is inherently immune to capture by normal moves 
		(special moves still quite effective).
  Special:  may attack-from distance any enemy piece in the same row 
                or column if there is EXACTLY one intervening piece,
                be it enemy or friendly.  This attack is protection-
		piercing.  

Caller:
  Normal:  moves and captures like a normal-chess Bishop
  Special: May assume the abilities of one captured enemy piece until
		the next time a friendly piece is captured. The	"called"
		piece will be placed in a prominent place apart from other
 		captured pieces. The next time a piece from the same side
		as the caller is captured by any means, or as soon as the 
		Caller wants to use the abilities of a different piece, 
		the captured enemy piece is handed back to its original 
		owner and may not be re-used.  Note that the act of
		changing abilities is instantaneous and can be used
		at any time without counting as a move.

Magitek Knight:
  Normal:  moves and captures like a normal-chess Knight
  Special: no piece, enemy or friendly, a King-move from the Magitek
 		knight can use any of its special abilities, nor be the
 		object of another piece's special ability.

ADVANCED RULES

The players decide before the game begins on the number of Dwarves, 
Sylphs, and Moogles each side is given.  Sylphs are mobile than 
Dwarves, but make it more difficult to defend and capture. 
Moogles are more mobile AND defensive than either of the above, but
their special ability is rather different to partially compensate. 
Once this has been decided, they are placed on the squares normally 
occupied by dwarves in any way the controlling player chooses.

(Note that unequal sides don't necessarily mean one player is giving
another a handicap, because the sides are slightly imbalanced to begin
with...)

Dwarves move and capture like normal-chess pawns and promote normally
using the rules below.  They may also prevent an enemy piece directly
in front of them from using its special abilities.

Sylphs are like Dwarves, except they move diagonally-forward and 
capture forward, rather than the other way around.  They may also 
prevent an enemy piece diagonally-forward from them from using its 
special abilities. They promote in the same way as Dwarves.

Moogles may move or capture either diagonally-forward or forward, 
giving them the normal powers of both Dwarves and Sylphs.  In 
addition, they may never be the object of a special ability, enemy
or friendly.  They also promote in the same way as Dwarves. 

Promotion now has an added twist to it, though.  There are three
basic ways you can choose to promote:  First, and most (relatively)
simply, You may choose to promote via the normal rules.  If you still
have your piece that started in that column you may sacrifice the Dwarf
to promote your piece to a new level.  (If you are playing Light and
still have your White Mage, the pawn in the example above could either
become a Red Mage, or sacrifice itself to promote the White Mage to a
White Wizard.)  This means, you guessed it, MORE new pieces.  Be warned:
some of these pieces are a little TOO powerful.  DON'T LET YOUR OPPONENT
GET AWAY WITH THIS! :)  To mark that a piece has been promoted, put a
checker under it (if this isn't already what you're doing to be able to
tell them apart in the first place! :>).  Lastly, if you have already
removed the enemy piece starting in the square you are promoting in
from play, but no longer have your own piece which started in the same 
column, you may opt to give the enemy back his piece (starting in the
same square it began, the Dwarf is removed) in exchange for a special
piece which may be placed anywhere on the friendly back rank.  If the
promotion took place on a chocobo's square, this piece is a Dwarven
Tank, if a Mage's square, this piece is a Caller, if a Knight's
square, this piece is a Magitek Knight, and if the Airship's square,
you may pick any of the three desired.

Upon promotion, Kings become Emperors and extend the range of their
special conversion ability to include both King's-move-adjacent and 
Knight's-move-adjacent squares.  Do NOT go near this guy. 

Airships become Warships and get cannons.  BIG cannons.  In addition 
to their original abilities, they may capture-from-a-distance any piece
in the same row, column, or diagonal as long as there is exactly one 
intervening piece, be it enemy or friendly.  This attack is protection-
piercing.  (A piece of advice to the side who watches his opponent
promote to this: try to die honorably, OK?).  Also, this attack-from
a distance does not count as a capture for the purpose of the pieces'
natural immunity to normal attack.

White Chocobos become Magic Chocobos, which in addition to their original
abilities, may move but not capture as a normal-chess knight while ridden
(normal).  They may never be the object of an enemy's special move, and 
have a similar protective effect upon their rider (*normal*). This 
includes immunity to the effects of enemy (but not friendly) Magitek
Knights

Chocobos become Chocobots.  In addition to their original abilities,
they may move but not capture as normal-chess knights either while
ridden (normal) or by themselves (special).  When being mounted, they
may move onto their rider's square rather than the other way around. 
(special)

Black Chocobos become Black Talons.  In addition to their original 
abilities, while ridden they may move (normal) or capture (special) as
a normal-chess knight, or they may slay-from-a-distance a piece one
square away from it diagonally (special).  They may also capture in the
same move as they leap over interposing pieces (special), though they
must still land on a black square. 

White Mages become White Wizards.  In addition to their original normal
move, they may move, but not capture, one square horizontally or 
vertically.  The range of their special ability has been expanded so 
that they now protect all friendly pieces a Queen's move away.  IN 
ADDITION, they get a new special ability:  Any enemy piece which could
use a normal move to capture a friendly piece exactly two squares 
diagonally from the White Wizard on its next move may be slain from 
a distance by the White Wizard. 

Red Mages become Red Wizards.  They may move as normal-chess Bishops
or Knights, and may move but not capture one square horizontally or 
vertically.  The range of their special abilities have been expanded
so that they now protect all friendly or slay from a distance any enemy
piece a Bishop's move away.

Black Mages become Black Wizards.  In addition to their original normal 
move, they may move, but not capture, one square horizontally or vertically. 
The range of their special ability has been expanded so that they may now 
slay from a distance any piece a Queen's-move away.  In addition, they get
a new special ability:  Any friendly piece exactly two squares diagonally 
from the Black Wizard may pierce protection with its own normal capture.

Paladins become True Paladins, in addition to their original moves, gain the
special ability of sacrifical defense.  Any time a friendly piece is captured,
the True Paladin has the option to sacrifice itself, removing both itself and 
the capturing piece from play, while allowing the "captured" piece to remain in 
play. This is a valid defense from check (the king is not  required to move out
of check while there is a friendly promoted Paladin in play). 

Dragoons become Dragon Knights and may move or capture as a normal-chess 
knight (2x1 jumping L) or may move not capture in a 3x1 jumping L for a normal
move.  For their special move, they have a protection-piercing 3x1 jumping 
L capture.

Dark Knights become Black Knights, and in addition to their original moves, 
gain the special ability of sacrifical attack. They may capture-from-a-distance
ANY piece they choose, but remove themselves from play at the same time.  
This is a valid attack against even an unprotected King (if there is no True
Paladin), and places him in check, mate if it is not possible to protect him.

THE REALLY ANNOYING OPTIONAL RULES (for those of you who would actually miss
					the touch-a-piece-move-a-piece rule
					from regular chess and would probably
					rather be playing "UNO" anyway) 

A black mage who doesn't notice that a piece is protected by a white mage
and attempts to capture from a distance is removed from play (Wall spell :> )
and loses his turn.

A dark knight who doesn't notice that a piece is protected by a paladin
(rather less likely) and attempts to capture from a distance is removed
from play and loses his turn. 

Any piece which doesn't notice that a piece is protected and attempts
to capture does not succeed (obviously) and loses his turn (appropriately)

A King which moves itself into check without noticing either LOSES THE GAME
(if the players agree to this before the game anyway) or has to take
back the move and lose his turn.

A player who checks the opponent's King without noticing it forfeits his 
chance to "capture" the King that move, allowing the King to wait to move 
out of check.

If a piece uses a special ability when another piece would prevent it
from doing so and is not caught gets away with it (the ability which
allows the enemy to prevent it requires concentration and discipline,
after all. :>)

Otherwise, for those who are particuarly peeved by Dwarvish Tanks and are 
otherwise playing by the basic rules, agree they may only be driven by 
Dwarves. :> 


And that's all he feels like writing (for now)!


SECTION FOR ADDENDA/CLARIFICATIONS AND OTHER MISCELLANY

This is a wierd one, but the question WAS asked, and may actually turn out
to be important.  Protection is NOT mandatory.  If the controlling player
chooses, the opposing player may capture a protected piece.  This is also
true of Dwarves' and Sylphs' option to prevent pieces in positions they
can move but not capture to from using their special abilities.  Affected
pieces may use their special abilities IF allowed by the player controlling
the Dwarf/Sylph.  HOWEVER Magitek Knights may NOT turn off their ability to
stop adjacent pieces from using/being the object of special abilities, as 
this would allow friendly pieces an unfair advantage.

no, carrying is NOT a special ability...

note from the descriptions that Airships'/Dwarven Tanks' immunity to 
normal attacks is also NOT a special ability

Yeesh, people...talk about a FAQ.  ANYTHING THAT IS LISTED UNDER 
"SPECIAL:" OR I SPECIFICALLY SAY IS SPECIAL IS A SPECIAL ABILITY AND 
NOTHING ELSE IS, OK?  

OK.

yes the King's special move converts carriers and their riders in one
fell swoop (including DTs)

yes protection makes you immune to attack-from-distance unless specified
otherwise (yes I know I already told you that but someone asked)

the inevitable question:  what if two Magitek Knights are a King's move 
adjacent? They both behave exactly as normal chess Knights, and all pieces 
a King's move adjacent to either of them (other than each other) are allowed 
to both use and be the objects of special moves
 
Even worse, what if two Magitek Knights are a King's move apart, and one
is riding a Magic Chocobo?  Smart question, but the answer is exactly
as the rules (technically) state.  The M. Knight on the M. Chocobo is
unaffected by the other's field, but the other's field is nullified
by that of the Chocobo-riding one.  Thus, all other pieces a king's
move from the chocobo-riding Knight may not use special abilities, while
those adjacent to the one on foot but not adjacent to the mounted one
have full abilities.

Note that if a Black Wizard is two spaces diagonally from a Black Knight, and 
Light cannot capture either and has no True Paladin, the game is over, Dark wins.

OK, if you've captured an enemy Caller and have a Caller yourself, you *could*
call the caller, but it wouldn't do you any good, really, now would it?

I've received a request for promotions to Chocobots...I suppose that could
work.  Let me think...(guess it did, rev. 0.98, but may need reversal)

Notation suggestions...?  
It has been noted that the variety of pieces makes it desirable to
note in the game log exactly what piece was moved, for example

Light		Dark
1.Dw(e2-e4)     1.Dw(e7-e5)

etc. Some symbols have been suggested for the new move types, and are
included here along with the old.

a1-b2   move
a1xb2   capture
a1/b2   slay-from-distance
a1Ob2   king's conversion move
a1-b2+  check delivered by move
a1-b2++ mate delivered by move
a1 :)   piece tried to make illegal move, lost turn (see optional rules)
a1 ;>   piece tried to make illegal move, was destroyed, lost turn

For those unfortunate among you who have never played Final Fantasy games:
  Aside from a STRONG recommendation to try them (esp. FF2 and FF3)
  all I can offer is to point out that Chocobos are vaguely
  ostrich-like birds used for transportation, that Dragoons are 
  just knights with a special jump attack, and anything else confusing
  probably has a logical reason for it in the FF series.  Otherwise...

email any more questions, comments, or suggestions to 
trekman@imsa.edu or ajuell@athena.valpo.edu, as they are
both actually the same person, though he is no longer
quite the Trek afficionado he once was (hence the name
change upon arrival at his new school)

The author makes no claim upon any of the characters mentioned in 
this document, only the rules.  Quite a bit of stuff in here is
actually related to Squaresoft's Final Fantasy series, and this
may be, but is not necessarily, a total coincidence brought
about by the Heisenberg Uncertaintly Principle dumping the
contents of a top-secret directory on www.ad-spin.jp to my 
hard drive.  Probably not, actually.  

The author is not responsible for any brain damage
incurred by attempting to actually understand these
rules.  Wait, you mean you already READ them?  Oops...

Kupo!
